README.md, before:

# rpnhs
A [reverse Polish notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reverse_Polish_notation) calculator in Haskell.

Inspired by [rpnpy](https://github.com/terrycojones/rpnpy).

For convenience, you may want to alias rpnhs in your shell.\
`alias hc='rpnhs'` (short for Haskell calculator)

### Feature overview
* General mathematical operators (see [operator list](#operators))
* Bitwise operations on integers
* Accepts values as integers (`3`), fractions (`1/4`), and decimals (`3.14`) (see [values](#values))
* Use arbitrary bases for both input and output of integers, supporting radix complement (see [bases](#bases))
* Load and store variables to and from the stack (see [variables](#variables))
* Uses a fractional representation where possible to avoid floating point inaccuracies (`1/2 + 1/2 = 1`)
* Define macros for constants or common patterns (e.g. `triple` -> `3 *`) (see [macros](#macros))
* Basic programs with labels and branching (see [programming](#programming))

### Commandline options
```
-p,--auto-print          Auto print if no output is produced from inline mode
--prompt PROMPT          Set the interactive mode prompt
-m,--macro-file FILE     Load a given macro file on startup
-h,--help                Show this help text
```

### Operation modes
rpnhs provides 2 modes of operation:
* Inline - process commandline arguments and print to stdout, for scripts or quick and simple calculations.
* Interactive - run a REPL-like environment, for more involved calculations and inspecting the stack.

#### Inline
To run the inline mode pass in instructions to the calculator as commandline arguments.\
`rpnhs 4 5 / 1 + p` will print `9/5` to stdout.\
`rpnhs '1 p 3 * p 3 * p 3 * p'` will print the first 4 powers of 3 to stdout, on separate lines.

Note the single quotes used in the second example. This is to prevent the shell expanding the `*` as a glob pattern.\
An alternative solution would be to use `mul` instead which is an alias for `*`. See [operators](#operators) for a complete list of operator aliases.

If execution fails, no output will be made to stdout, and an error message will be printed to stderr.\
`rpnhs 1 2 + p hi` produces only `parse error: unrecognised token (hi)`

#### Interactive
To run the interactive mode, run rpnhs with no arguments.\
`rpnhs`

You are then presented with a prompt to input any number of instructions. After pressing enter, the instructions will be executed, and the state of the calculator modified.
```
> 1
> 2
> +
> p
 3
> 3 + p
 6
```
To get a feel for things try using the `stack` command to inspect the stack after each step.

If execution fails, the calculator's state will revert to before that line was run.
```
> 1
> 2 0 /
error: operator failed
> p
 1
```

To exit the calculator, enter `q`.

##### Metacommands
Metacommands begin with `:` and can only be used in interactive mode. They must occupy the entire line when used.
| Metacommand        | Description                                            |
| :----------------- | :----------------------------------------------------- |
| `:q`               | Exit the calculator (same as `q`)                      |
| `:u[n]`            | Undo the last `n` successful lines (default 1)         |
| `:def [macro def]` | Define a new macro (see [macros](#macros) for details) |


### Commands
Commands are instructions for interacting with the calculator in ways other than pushing values and applying operators.
| Command          | Description                                                                                        |
| :--------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `print`, `p`     | Print the value at the top of the stack (see [bases](#bases) for printing in other bases)          |
| `stack`, `f`     | Print all values in the stack, with the top value at the rightmost position                        |
| `pop[n]`, `r`    | Pop the top `n` (default 1) values from the stack (without printing)                               |
| `clear`, `c`     | Empty the stack                                                                                    |
| `dup[n]`, `d[n]` | Duplicate the top value of the stack `n` times (default 1)                                         |
| `pull[n]`        | Pull the `n`th value on the stack to the top                                                       |
| `swap`, `s`      | Swap the top 2 values on the stack (alias for `pull2`)                                             |
| `depth`, `z`     | Push the current depth of the stack                                                                |
| `s[name]`        | Pop the top value on the stack and store it in the variable `name`, overwriting any previous value |
| `l[name]`        | Load the value in `name` and push it to the stack (fails if undefined)                             |
| `view`, `v`      | View the values of all variables                                                                   |
| `v[name]`        | View the value in `name`                                                                           |

### Operators
Operators pop 1-2 values from the top of the stack, and push back a single result.

#### General
| Operator            | Notes                               | Arity |
| :------------------ | :---------------------------------- | :---- |
| `abs`               |                                     | 1     |
| `neg`, `negate`     |                                     | 1     |
| `recip`             |                                     | 1     |
| `sqrt`, `root`      |                                     | 1     |
| `exp`, `e^`         |                                     | 1     |
| `ln`                |                                     | 1     |
| `log2`              |                                     | 1     |
| `fact`, `!`         |                                     | 1     |
| `add`, `plus`, `+`  |                                     | 2     |
| `sub`, `minus`, `-` |                                     | 2     |
| `mul`, `times`, `*` |                                     | 2     |
| `div`, `/`          | true division                       | 2     |
| `idiv`, `i/`        | integer division                    | 2     |
| `mod`, `%`          | truncated towards negative infinity | 2     |
| `pow`, `^`          |                                     | 2     |
| `log`               | `a b log` -> logb(a)                | 2     |

#### Trigonometry
| Operator           | Arity |
| :----------------- | :---- |
| `sin`              | 1     |
| `cos`              | 1     |
| `tan`              | 1     |
| `sinh`             | 1     |
| `cosh`             | 1     |
| `tanh`             | 1     |
| `asin`, `arcsin`   | 1     |
| `acos`, `arccos`   | 1     |
| `atan`, `arctan`   | 1     |
| `asinh`, `arcsinh` | 1     |
| `acosh`, `arccosh` | 1     |
| `atanh`, `arctanh` | 1     |

The above operators work with radians.

To convert between radians and degrees the below operators are provided.
| Operator | Notes              | Arity |
| :------- | :----------------- | :---- |
| `deg`    | radians -> degrees | 1     |
| `rad`    | degrees -> radians | 1     |


#### Bitwise
| Operator      | Arity |
| :------------ | :---- |
| `not`, `~`    | 1     |
| `and`, `&`    | 2     |
| `or`, `\|`    | 2     |
| `nand`, `~&`  | 2     |
| `nor`, `~\|`  | 2     |
| `xor`         | 2     |

Note that bitwise operators work on the two's complement representation of values.\
`0 ~ p` prints `-1`

#### Binary shifts
| Operator       | Arity |
| :------------- | :---- |
| `lshift`, `<<` | 2     |
| `rshift`, `>>` | 2     |

`0b10010 2 << pb` prints `1001000`

Right shifts are sign extended, so behaviour with negative values should be intuitive.\
`-40 2 >> p` prints `-10`

When provided a negative shift amount, the shift will be made in the opposite direction.\
`n <<` will act the same as `-n >>`

#### Comparison operators
| Operator        | Arity |
| :-------------- | :---- |
| `lt`, `<`       | 2     |
| `lte`, `<=`     | 2     |
| `eq`, `==`, `=` | 2     |
| `neq`, `!=`     | 2     |
| `gte`, `>=`     | 2     |
| `gt`, `>`       | 2     |

These operators push `1` to the stack if the result is true, or `0` if the result is false.\
They are useful in combination with the `B` [prog-command](#programming-commands).

#### Misc
| Operator          | Notes                                                                              | Arity |
| :---------------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :---- |
| `rnd`, `round`    | round to the nearest integer                                                       | 1     |
| `floor`           | round to the greatest integer <= the value                                         | 1     |
| `ceil`, `ceiling` | round to the least integer >= the value                                            | 1     |
| `fl`, `float`     | convert a value to a float (useful if a fractional representation in inconvenient) | 1     |

#### Folding operators
For some binary operators a folding variant is available.\
These operators consume the entire stack, leaving the final result in its place.
```
> 1 2 3 4 5 f
 1 2 3 4 5
> ++ f
 15
```

| Folding variant | Binary operator |
| :-------------- | :-------------- |
| `++`            | `+`             |
| `**`            | `*`             |
| `&&`            | `&`             |
| `\|\|`          | `\|`            |

Some care should be taken when using these operators. If there are values in the stack leftover from previous calculations, these will be included in the fold. The `c` command may be useful before setting up a fold.

### Values
Pushing values to the stack can be done in different forms.
|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| Integer  | `3`    |
| Fraction | `1/4`  |
| Decimal  | `3.14` |

A prefix minus can be used with any valid value.\
`-5 -3/10 * p` prints `3/2`

A few constants are also available.
* `pi`
* `e`
* `g` (as 9.81)

`pi e - p` prints `0.423310825130748`

See [bases](#bases) for declaring integers in different bases.

### Bases
Base representations use digits 0-9, followed by characters a-z (lowercase). The maximum base supported is 36.\
There is no support for inputting or printing non-integer values in other bases.

#### Input
|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| Binary   | `0b(~)...` |
| Octal    | `0o(~)...` |
| Hex      | `0x(~)...` |
| Base `n` | `n(~)'...` |

For binary, octal, and hex, the leading `0` is optional.

`0b1001 p` prints `9`\
`0x5a p` prints `90`\
`3'12021 p` prints `142`

When `~` is given in the position indicated above, the input is interpreted as a radix complement representation (In binary, this is two's complement).

`0b~01001 p` prints `9`\
`0b~1001 p` prints `-7`\
`10~'856 p` prints `-144`

#### Printing
The `p` command can be extended with base information.
|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| Binary   | `pb(~)`  |
| Octal    | `po(~)`  |
| Hex      | `px(~)`  |
| Base `n` | `p'n(~)` |

`9 pb` prints `1001`\
`90 px` prints `5a`\
`142 p'3` prints `12021`\
`-9 pb` prints `-1001`

When `~` is given in the position indicated above, the value is printed in a radix complement representation (In binary, this is two's complement).

`9 pb~` prints `01001`\
`-7 pb~` prints `1001`\
`-144 p'10~` prints `856`

### Variables
Loading and storing variables is done with the `l` and `s` [commands](#commands).\
The below example uses the variables `x` and `y`.
```
> 1 sx 2 sy
> p
error: empty stack
> lx ly + p
 3
```

Here's an example of the quadratic formula in use.
```
> 1 sa -2 sb -15 sc
> lb neg lb 2 ^ 4 la * lc * - sqrt + 2 la * / p
 5.0
> lb neg lb 2 ^ 4 la * lc * - sqrt - 2 la * / p
 -3.0
```

### Macros

Macros are single words that are expanded into a list of instructions.\
They can be used to define new constants, avoid repetition of common patterns, or define new operators in terms of existing ones.

To define a macro in interactive mode, use the `:def` metacommand.
```
> :def triple 3 *
```
The first word is the name of the macro, and the remaining line will be its expansion.

Using macros is simple.
```
> 4 triple p
 12
> 9 triple p
 27
```

Here are a few examples of macros you may find useful.
```
nroot  recip pow
avg    z scnt ++ lcnt /
ncr    sr sn' ln' ! lr ! ln' lr - ! * i/
npr    sr sn' ln' ! ln' lr - ! i/
quad   sc sb sa lb neg lb 2 ^ 4 la * lc * - sqrt + 2 la * / lb neg lb 2 ^ 4 la * lc * - sqrt - 2 la * /
```

Macro definitions can contain other macros themselves.
```
> :def triple 3 *
> :def inc 1 +
> :def tripinc triple inc
> 4 tripinc p
 13
```

Macros cannot contain themselves. This includes an indirect reference through other macros.
```
> :def a b
> :def b a
```
Attempting to use such a macro will produce an error like the following:
```
> a
parse error: unrecognised token (a)
```

#### Saved macros
To avoid redefining the same macro between sessions, you can save them.\
Saved macros are loaded from a macro file on start up, and are always available (including from inline mode).

The following files are tried in order:
*  A file supplied to the `--macro-file` option
*  `$RPNHS_MACRO_FILE`
*  `~/.rpnhs_macros`
*  `~/.config/rpnhs/macros`
*  `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/rpnhs/macros`

The macro file should be a plain text file containing 1 macro definition per line.\
Empty lines and lines beginning with `#` are ignored.

For example:
```
~/.rpnhs_macros
----------------------
# nth root
# 64 3 nroot -> 4
nroot  recip pow

# mean
# c 8.2 4.3 10 5/2 avg -> 6.25
avg  z scnt ++ lcnt /
```

### Programming
A system of labels and branching is available for writing simple programs.

The following program prints out the numbers 1-10 using a simple loop.
```
> 1 [L1] p 1 + d 10 <= BL1
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
```

Programs execute within a single line of instructions. This means you cannot jump to labels defined earlier in an interactive session.

#### Labels
Labels represent a point in the program that can be jumped to.\
To declare a label, use square brackets around a name.\
`[L1]`, `[START]`, `[end]`

Labels cannot be defined multiple times in 1 line, as the program would be ambiguous.
```
> [L1] [L2] [L1]
label error: label L1 is defined multiple times
```

#### Programming commands
These commands interact with the control flow of the calculator.

| Prog-command | Description                                                       |
| :----------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `J[label]`   | Perform an unconditional jump to the specified label              |
| `B[label]`   | Branch to the specified label if the top of the stack is non-zero |
| `RET`        | Exit execution as if there are no more instructions               |
| `ERR`        | Exit execution with a user error                                  |

You will likely want to use a [comparison operator](#comparison-operators) when using with the `B` command.\
The example program above contains `10 <= BL1`. This will branch to `[L1]` if the top of the stack is less than or equal to `10`.

Since comparisons are normal operators, they consume the values they compare. You may find the `d` command useful just before making a comparison.

Here's a more complex example that makes use of both jumps and branches.\
The `collatz` macro computes the [Collatz conjecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collatz_conjecture) sequence for the number at the top of the stack. Each step in the computation is printed, and the total number of steps taken is pushed onto the stack at the end.
```
> :def collatz 0 scnt [S] p d 1 = BE lcnt 1 + scnt d 2 % BODD 2 i/ JS [ODD] 3 * 1 + JS [E] r lcnt
> 10 collatz
 10
 5
 16
 8
 4
 2
 1
> p
 6
> 13 collatz
 13
 40
 20
 10
 5
 16
 8
 4
 2
 1
> p
 9
```

#### Programming limitations
With prog-commands it may be tempting to think of macros as commands that can be composed to build up complex programs.\
However there is a barrier to this. Macros provide no 'scope', meaning all labels live in the same namespace.\
Consider the `collatz` macro from before. Attempting to 'call' this macro twice in the same line has an unexpected result.
```
> 10 collatz 13 collatz
label error: label S is defined multiple times
```
Both macros are expanded, and since they each define the `[S]` label, we are left with an ambiguous program.\
This could be avoided by writing a loop around a single call to `collatz`, but with these workarounds we find that the complexity of our program grows far faster than the complexity of the problem.

Macros and the programming features can be very powerful for simple processes, but they should not be relied on in place of a proper programming environment.

#### Example: Godel numberings
To wrap up, here's a realistic example where macros and the programming features come in handy.

These macros facilitate translating between pairs of naturals and a single [godel number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del_numbering).\
The `<<>>` macros use the numbering `<<x, y>>  <->  2^x(2y + 1)` and the `<>` macros use `<x, y>  <->  2^x(2y + 1) - 1`.
```
# godel encode (N, N) -> N+
<<e>>  2 * 1 + s 2 s ^ *
# godel encode (N, N) -> N
<e>    <<e>> 1 -
# godel decode N+ -> (N, N)
<<d>>  0 s [S] d 2 %     BE 1 >> s 1 + s JS [E] 1 >>
# godel decode N  -> (N, N)
<d>    0 s [S] d 2 % 0 = BE 1 >> s 1 + s JS [E] 1 >>
```

Without these macros, working with these godel numberings can be time consuming and error prone.\
By using the programming features, decoding can be achieved without resorting to a full programming environment.

Commit message:

refactor Error to contain context information, add -i and -s cmdline switches

README.md, after:

# rpnhs
A [reverse Polish notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reverse_Polish_notation) calculator in Haskell.

Inspired by [rpnpy](https://github.com/terrycojones/rpnpy) and [dc](https://www.gnu.org/software/bc/manual/dc-1.05/html_mono/dc.html).

For convenience, you may want to alias rpnhs in your shell.\
`alias hc='rpnhs'` (short for Haskell calculator)

### Feature overview
* General mathematical operators (see [operator list](#operators))
* Bitwise operations on integers
* Accepts values as integers (`3`), fractions (`1/4`), and decimals (`3.14`) (see [values](#values))
* Use arbitrary bases for both input and output of integers, supporting radix complement (see [bases](#bases))
* Load and store variables to and from the stack (see [variables](#variables))
* Uses a fractional representation where possible to avoid floating point inaccuracies (`1/2 + 1/2 = 1`)
* Define macros for constants or common patterns (e.g. `triple` -> `3 *`) (see [macros](#macros))
* Basic programs with labels and branching (see [programming](#programming))

### Commandline options
```
-P,--prompt PROMPT       Set the interactive mode prompt
-p,--auto-print          Auto print if no output is produced from inline mode
-i,--eprint-instructions Print remaining instructions when an error occurs
-s,--eprint-stack        Print the stack when an error occurs
-m,--macro-file FILE     Load a given macro file on startup
-h,--help                Show this help text
```

### Operation modes
rpnhs provides 2 modes of operation:
* Inline - process commandline arguments and print to stdout, for scripts or quick and simple calculations.
* Interactive - run a REPL-like environment, for more involved calculations and inspecting the stack.

#### Inline
To run the inline mode pass in instructions to the calculator as commandline arguments.\
`rpnhs 4 5 / 1 + p` will print `9/5` to stdout.\
`rpnhs '1 p 3 * p 3 * p 3 * p'` will print the first 4 powers of 3 to stdout, on separate lines.

Note the single quotes used in the second example. This is to prevent the shell expanding the `*` as a glob pattern.\
An alternative solution would be to use `mul` instead which is an alias for `*`. See [operators](#operators) for a complete list of operator aliases.

If execution fails, no output will be made to stdout, and an error message will be printed to stderr.\
`rpnhs 1 2 + p hi` produces only `parse error: unrecognised token (hi)`

#### Interactive
To start the interactive mode, run rpnhs with no arguments.\
`rpnhs`

You are then presented with a prompt to input any number of instructions. After pressing enter, the instructions will be executed, and the state of the calculator modified.
```
> 1
> 2
> +
> p
 3
> 3 + p
 6
```
To get a feel for things try using the `stack` command to inspect the stack after each step.

If execution fails, the calculator's state will revert to before that line was run.
```
> 1
> 2 0 /
error: operator failed
> p
 1
```

To exit the calculator, enter `q`.

##### Metacommands
Metacommands begin with `:` and can only be used in interactive mode. They must occupy the entire line when used.
| Metacommand        | Description                                            |
| :----------------- | :----------------------------------------------------- |
| `:q`               | Exit the calculator (same as `q`)                      |
| `:u[n]`            | Undo the last `n` successful lines (default 1)         |
| `:def [macro def]` | Define a new macro (see [macros](#macros) for details) |


### Commands
Commands are instructions for interacting with the calculator in ways other than pushing values and applying operators.
| Command          | Description                                                                                        |
| :--------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `print`, `p`     | Print the value at the top of the stack (see [bases](#bases) for printing in other bases)          |
| `stack`, `f`     | Print all values in the stack, with the top value at the rightmost position                        |
| `pop[n]`, `r`    | Pop the top `n` (default 1) values from the stack (without printing)                               |
| `clear`, `c`     | Empty the stack                                                                                    |
| `dup[n]`, `d[n]` | Duplicate the top value of the stack `n` times (default 1)                                         |
| `pull[n]`        | Pull the `n`th value on the stack to the top                                                       |
| `swap`, `s`      | Swap the top 2 values on the stack (alias for `pull2`)                                             |
| `depth`, `z`     | Push the current depth of the stack                                                                |
| `s[name]`        | Pop the top value on the stack and store it in the variable `name`, overwriting any previous value |
| `l[name]`        | Load the value in `name` and push it to the stack (fails if undefined)                             |
| `view`, `v`      | View the values of all variables                                                                   |
| `v[name]`        | View the value in `name`                                                                           |

### Operators
Operators pop 1-2 values from the top of the stack, and push back a single result.

#### General
| Operator            | Notes                               | Arity |
| :------------------ | :---------------------------------- | :---- |
| `abs`               |                                     | 1     |
| `neg`, `negate`     |                                     | 1     |
| `recip`             |                                     | 1     |
| `sqrt`, `root`      |                                     | 1     |
| `exp`, `e^`         |                                     | 1     |
| `ln`                |                                     | 1     |
| `log2`              |                                     | 1     |
| `fact`, `!`         |                                     | 1     |
| `add`, `plus`, `+`  |                                     | 2     |
| `sub`, `minus`, `-` |                                     | 2     |
| `mul`, `times`, `*` |                                     | 2     |
| `div`, `/`          | true division                       | 2     |
| `idiv`, `i/`        | integer division                    | 2     |
| `mod`, `%`          | truncated towards negative infinity | 2     |
| `pow`, `^`          |                                     | 2     |
| `log`               | `a b log` -> logb(a)                | 2     |

#### Trigonometry
| Operator           | Arity |
| :----------------- | :---- |
| `sin`              | 1     |
| `cos`              | 1     |
| `tan`              | 1     |
| `sinh`             | 1     |
| `cosh`             | 1     |
| `tanh`             | 1     |
| `asin`, `arcsin`   | 1     |
| `acos`, `arccos`   | 1     |
| `atan`, `arctan`   | 1     |
| `asinh`, `arcsinh` | 1     |
| `acosh`, `arccosh` | 1     |
| `atanh`, `arctanh` | 1     |

The above operators work with radians.

To convert between radians and degrees the below operators are provided.
| Operator | Notes              | Arity |
| :------- | :----------------- | :---- |
| `deg`    | radians -> degrees | 1     |
| `rad`    | degrees -> radians | 1     |


#### Bitwise
| Operator      | Arity |
| :------------ | :---- |
| `not`, `~`    | 1     |
| `and`, `&`    | 2     |
| `or`, `\|`    | 2     |
| `nand`, `~&`  | 2     |
| `nor`, `~\|`  | 2     |
| `xor`         | 2     |

Note that bitwise operators work on the two's complement representation of values.\
`0 ~ p` prints `-1`

#### Binary shifts
| Operator       | Arity |
| :------------- | :---- |
| `lshift`, `<<` | 2     |
| `rshift`, `>>` | 2     |

`0b10010 2 << pb` prints `1001000`

Right shifts are sign extended, so behaviour with negative values should be intuitive.\
`-40 2 >> p` prints `-10`

When provided a negative shift amount, the shift will be made in the opposite direction.\
`n <<` will act the same as `-n >>`

#### Comparison operators
| Operator        | Arity |
| :-------------- | :---- |
| `lt`, `<`       | 2     |
| `lte`, `<=`     | 2     |
| `eq`, `==`, `=` | 2     |
| `neq`, `!=`     | 2     |
| `gte`, `>=`     | 2     |
| `gt`, `>`       | 2     |

These operators push `1` to the stack if the result is true, or `0` if the result is false.\
`3 4 < p` prints `1`

They are useful in combination with the `B` [prog-command](#programming-commands).

#### Misc
| Operator          | Notes                                                                              | Arity |
| :---------------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :---- |
| `rnd`, `round`    | round to the nearest integer                                                       | 1     |
| `floor`           | round to the greatest integer <= the value                                         | 1     |
| `ceil`, `ceiling` | round to the least integer >= the value                                            | 1     |
| `fl`, `float`     | convert a value to a float (useful if a fractional representation in inconvenient) | 1     |

#### Folding operators
For some binary operators a folding variant is available.\
These operators consume the entire stack, leaving the final result in its place.
```
> 1 2 3 4 5 f
 1 2 3 4 5
> ++ f
 15
```

| Folding variant | Binary operator |
| :-------------- | :-------------- |
| `++`            | `+`             |
| `**`            | `*`             |
| `&&`            | `&`             |
| `\|\|`          | `\|`            |

Some care should be taken when using these operators. If there are values in the stack leftover from previous calculations, these will be included in the fold. The `c` command may be useful before setting up a fold.

### Values
Pushing values to the stack can be done in different forms.
|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| Integer  | `3`    |
| Fraction | `1/4`  |
| Decimal  | `3.14` |

A prefix minus can be used with any valid value.\
`-5 -3/10 * p` prints `3/2`

A few constants are also available.
* `pi`
* `e`
* `g` (as 9.81)

`pi e - p` prints `0.423310825130748`

See [bases](#bases) for declaring integers in different bases.

### Bases
Base representations use digits 0-9, followed by characters a-z (lowercase). The maximum base supported is 36.\
There is no support for inputting or printing non-integer values in other bases.

#### Input
|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| Binary   | `0b(~)...` |
| Octal    | `0o(~)...` |
| Hex      | `0x(~)...` |
| Base `n` | `n(~)'...` |

For binary, octal, and hex, the leading `0` is optional.

`0b1001 p` prints `9`\
`0x5a p` prints `90`\
`3'12021 p` prints `142`

When `~` is given in the position indicated above, the input is interpreted as a radix complement representation (In binary, this is two's complement).

`0b~01001 p` prints `9`\
`0b~1001 p` prints `-7`\
`10~'856 p` prints `-144`

#### Printing
The `p` command can be extended with base information.
|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| Binary   | `pb(~)`  |
| Octal    | `po(~)`  |
| Hex      | `px(~)`  |
| Base `n` | `p'n(~)` |

`9 pb` prints `1001`\
`90 px` prints `5a`\
`142 p'3` prints `12021`\
`-9 pb` prints `-1001`

When `~` is given in the position indicated above, the value is printed in a radix complement representation (In binary, this is two's complement).

`9 pb~` prints `01001`\
`-7 pb~` prints `1001`\
`-144 p'10~` prints `856`

### Variables
Loading and storing variables is done with the `l` and `s` [commands](#commands).\
The below example uses the variables `x` and `y`.
```
> 1 sx 2 sy
> p
error: empty stack
> lx ly + p
 3
```

Here's an example of the quadratic formula in use.
```
> 1 sa -2 sb -15 sc
> lb neg lb 2 ^ 4 la * lc * - sqrt + 2 la * / p
 5.0
> lb neg lb 2 ^ 4 la * lc * - sqrt - 2 la * / p
 -3.0
```

### Macros

Macros are single words that are expanded into a list of instructions.\
They can be used to define new constants, avoid repetition of common patterns, or define new operators in terms of existing ones.

To define a macro in interactive mode, use the `:def` metacommand.
```
> :def triple 3 *
```
The first word is the name of the macro, and the remaining line will be its expansion.

Using macros is simple.
```
> 4 triple p
 12
> 9 triple p
 27
```

Here are a few examples of macros you may find useful.
```
nroot  recip pow
avg    z scnt ++ lcnt /
ncr    sr sn' ln' ! lr ! ln' lr - ! * i/
npr    sr sn' ln' ! ln' lr - ! i/
quad   sc sb sa lb neg lb 2 ^ 4 la * lc * - sqrt + 2 la * / lb neg lb 2 ^ 4 la * lc * - sqrt - 2 la * /
```

Macro definitions can contain other macros themselves.
```
> :def triple 3 *
> :def inc 1 +
> :def tripinc triple inc
> 4 tripinc p
 13
```

Macros cannot contain themselves. This includes an indirect reference through other macros.
```
> :def a b
> :def b a
```
Attempting to use such a macro will produce an error like the following:
```
> a
parse error: unrecognised token (a)
```

#### Saved macros
To avoid redefining the same macro between sessions, you can save them.\
Saved macros are loaded from a macro file on start up, and are always available (including from inline mode).

The following files are tried in order:
*  A file supplied to the `--macro-file` option
*  `$RPNHS_MACRO_FILE`
*  `~/.rpnhs_macros`
*  `~/.config/rpnhs/macros`
*  `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/rpnhs/macros`

The macro file should be a plain text file containing 1 macro definition per line.\
Empty lines and lines beginning with `#` are ignored.

For example:
```
~/.rpnhs_macros
----------------------
# nth root
# 64 3 nroot -> 4
nroot  recip pow

# mean
# c 8.2 4.3 10 5/2 avg -> 6.25
avg  z scnt ++ lcnt /
```

### Programming
A system of labels and branching is available for writing simple programs.

The following program prints out the numbers 1-10 using a simple loop.
```
> 1 [L1] p 1 + d 10 <= BL1
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
```

Programs execute within a single line of instructions. This means you cannot jump to labels defined earlier in an interactive session.

#### Labels
Labels represent a point in the program that can be jumped to.\
To declare a label, use square brackets around a name.\
`[L1]`, `[START]`, `[end]`

Labels cannot be defined multiple times in 1 line, as the program would be ambiguous.
```
> [L1] [L2] [L1]
label error: label L1 is defined multiple times
```

#### Programming commands
These commands interact with the control flow of the calculator.

| Prog-command | Description                                                       |
| :----------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `J[label]`   | Perform an unconditional jump to the specified label              |
| `B[label]`   | Branch to the specified label if the top of the stack is non-zero |
| `RET`        | Exit execution as if there are no more instructions               |
| `ERR`        | Exit execution with a user error                                  |

You will likely want to use a [comparison operator](#comparison-operators) when using with the `B` command.\
The example program above contains `10 <= BL1`. This will branch to `[L1]` if the top of the stack is less than or equal to `10`.

Since comparisons are normal operators, they consume the values they compare. You may find the `d` command useful just before making a comparison.

Here's a more complex example that makes use of both jumps and branches.\
The `collatz` macro computes the [Collatz conjecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collatz_conjecture) sequence for the number at the top of the stack. Each step in the computation is printed, and the total number of steps taken is pushed onto the stack at the end.
```
> :def collatz 0 scnt [S] p d 1 = BE lcnt 1 + scnt d 2 % BODD 2 i/ JS [ODD] 3 * 1 + JS [E] r lcnt
> 10 collatz
 10
 5
 16
 8
 4
 2
 1
> p
 6
> 13 collatz
 13
 40
 20
 10
 5
 16
 8
 4
 2
 1
> p
 9
```

#### Programming limitations
With prog-commands it may be tempting to think of macros as functions that can be composed to build up complex programs.\
However there is a barrier to this. Macros provide no 'scope', meaning all labels live in the same namespace.\
Consider the `collatz` macro from before. Attempting to 'call' this macro twice in the same line has an unexpected result.
```
> 10 collatz 13 collatz
label error: label S is defined multiple times
```
Both macros are expanded, and since they each define the `[S]` label, we are left with an ambiguous program.\
This could be avoided by writing a loop around a single call to `collatz`, but with these workarounds we find that the complexity of our program grows far faster than the complexity of the problem.

Macros and the programming features can be very powerful for simple processes, but they should not be relied on in place of a proper programming environment.

#### Example: Godel numberings
To wrap up, here's a realistic example where macros and the programming features come in handy.

These macros facilitate translating between pairs of naturals and a single [godel number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del_numbering).\
The `<<>>` macros use the numbering `<<x, y>>  <->  2^x(2y + 1)` and the `<>` macros use `<x, y>  <->  2^x(2y + 1) - 1`.
```
# godel encode (N, N) -> N+
<<e>>  2 * 1 + s 2 s ^ *
# godel encode (N, N) -> N
<e>    <<e>> 1 -
# godel decode N+ -> (N, N)
<<d>>  0 s [S] d 2 %     BE 1 >> s 1 + s JS [E] 1 >>
# godel decode N  -> (N, N)
<d>    0 s [S] d 2 % 0 = BE 1 >> s 1 + s JS [E] 1 >>
```

Without these macros, working with these godel numberings can be time consuming and error prone.\
By using the programming features, decoding can be achieved without resorting to a full programming environment.
